installation-guide/ka_inst_man_tomcat.rst, before:

Using Tomcat
----------------

Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~
You must add required libraries into ``TOMCAT_HOME/lib`` folder:

-  the JDBC connector for the metadata database with its dependencies (if any);
-  the JDBC connector for the business data database with its dependencies (if any);
-  the commonj library with its dependencies:

   -  `Apache Geronimo <https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=org/apache/geronimo/specs/geronimo-commonj_1.1_spec/1.0/geronimo-commonj_1.1_spec-1.0.jar>`_,
   -  `Concurrency JSR-166 <https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=org/lucee/oswego-concurrent/1.3.4/oswego-concurrent-1.3.4.jar>`_,
   -  `CommonJ <https://github.com/SpagoBILabs/SpagoBI/raw/mvn-repo/releases/de/myfoo/commonj/1.0/commonj-1.0.jar>`_.

.. important::
         **Enterprise Edition only**

         To enable the Import/Export capability, please also add the JDBC connector for `HyperSQLDB <https://repository.jboss.org/nexus/content/repositories/thirdparty-releases/hsqldb/hsqldb/1.8.0.2/hsqldb-1.8.0.2.jar>`_ , taking care of using version 1.8.0.2 .


File system resources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create the folder ``TOMCAT_HOME/resources``. Such a folder will contain some useful static resources and the indexes for the search engine used by Knowage.

Connection to metadata database
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To define connection towards metadata database, edit the ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` and add the information related to the metadata database inside the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag. Specify: username, password, driver class name, JDBC URL and validation query (any valid query to be executed to validate connections). Connection's name must the ``jdbc/knowage``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

    <Resource auth="Container"
    	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
    	name="jdbc/knowage"
    	password="<password>"
    	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
    	url="<JDBC URL>"
    	username="<user name>"
    	validationQuery="<validation query>"
    	maxTotal="50"
    	maxIdle="50"
    	minIdle="10"
    	validationInterval="34000"
    	removeAbandoned="true"
    	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
    	logAbandoned="true"
    	testOnBorrow="true"
    	testWhileIdle="true"
    	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
    	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000" />


Cache database connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In some scenarios (for example when defining a cockpit document on top of a file dataset), Knowage requires a database to be used as cache. It is highly recommended to create an empty database schema for this purpose. Then, you need to configure it inside ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` as you did for metadata database. Feel free to type a name of your choice, in this example we used ``jdbc/ds_cache``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

    <Resource auth="Container"
    	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
    	name="jdbc/ds_cache"
    	password="<password>"
    	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
    	url="<JDBC URL>"
    	username="<user name>"
    	validationQuery="<validation query>"
    	maxTotal="50"
    	maxIdle="50"
    	minIdle="10"
    	validationInterval="34000"
    	removeAbandoned="true"
    	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
    	logAbandoned="true"
    	testOnBorrow="true"
    	testWhileIdle="true"
    	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
    	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000" />


Connection to business data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Edit the ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` and add the information related to the database containing business data to be analysed by Knowage inside the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, specifying username, password, driver class name, URL and validation query. Feel free to type a name of your choice, in this example we used ``jdbc/dwh``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

  <Resource auth="Container"
  	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
  	name="jdbc/dwh"
  	password="<password>"
  	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
  	url="<JDBC URL>"
  	username="<user name>"
  	validationQuery="<validation query>"
  	maxTotal="50"
  	maxIdle="50"
  	minIdle="10"
  	validationInterval="34000"
  	removeAbandoned="true"
  	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
  	logAbandoned="true"
  	testOnBorrow="true"
  	testWhileIdle="true"
  	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
  	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000"
  	factory="org.apache.tomcat.jdbc.pool.DataSourceFactory" />


Environment variables definition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Edit the file ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` in Tomcat and add the following constants in the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, by setting the domain within the ``host_url`` value. That domain will be used by the browser to call Knowage server.

.. code-block:: xml
        :linenos:
        :caption: Tomcat environment variables configuration.

  <Environment name="resource_path" type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/resources"/>
  <Environment name="sso_class" type="java.lang.String" value="it.eng.spagobi.services.common.JWTSsoService"/>
  <Environment name="service_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080/knowage"/>
  <Environment name="host_url" type="java.lang.String" value="<server URL which is hosting knowage>"/>
  <Environment name="hmacKey" description="HMAC key" type="java.lang.String" value="...PUT_HMACKEY_VALUE_HERE..."/>
  <Environment name="password_encryption_secret" description="File for security encryption location" type="java.lang.String" value="<complete_file_path_with_file_name>"/>

Such environment variables have the following meaning:

- ``resource_path``: resources folder path,
- ``sso_class``:SSO connector class name,
- ``service_url``:backend services address, typically set to ``http://localhost:8080/knowage``,
- ``host_url``: frontend services address, the one the user types in his browser.
- ``hmacKey``: secret key to generate JWT tokens used by the default security mechanism. You **must change** it, and **do not distribute** it.
- ``password_encryption_secret``: File used for password encryption. The file must contain random text of any length. This is a security configuration, so don't use short strings. For example, you can create a file and write text into it. **Do not distribute** it for any reason.


.. important::

	 For security reasons the environment variable ``hmacKey`` must have a different value than **...PUT_HMACKEY_VALUE_HERE...**. Please DO NOT use the value shown in this documentation to avoid reducing the security level.


Below you can see an example of configuration of the above variables in the server.xml file

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

  <Environment name="resource_path" type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/resources"/>
  <Environment name="sso_class" type="java.lang.String" value="it.eng.spagobi.services.common.JWTSsoService"/>
  <Environment name="host_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080"/>
  <Environment name="service_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080/knowage"/>
  <Environment name="hmacKey" description="HMAC key" type="java.lang.String" value="<value_to_replace>"/>
  <Environment name="password_encryption_secret" description="File for security encryption location"
    type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/conf/knowage.secret"/>


Applications deploy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To deploy Knowage you have to copy all the WAR files inside the ``TOMCAT_HOME/webapps`` folder.
Once the first start is ended each WAR file will be unzipped. It is also possible to unzip the WAR files manually using the unzip utility.


Thread pool defintion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You must configure ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` file and add the settings related to the pool of thread editing the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, as shown follow.

.. code-block:: xml
	:linenos:

	<Resource auth="Container" factory="de.myfoo.commonj.work.FooWorkManagerFactory" maxThreads="5" name="wm/SpagoWorkManager" type="commonj.work.WorkManager"/>


Advanced memory settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommended to increase the memory dimension used by the application server. This can be done by adjusting some properties. The memory required by each application server depends on many factors: number of users, type of analyses, amount of handled data, etc. The minimum requirements are ``Xms1024m`` and ``Xmx2048m``.

**[LINUX]** Insert at the beginning of the ``TOMCAT_HOME/bin/setenv.sh`` file this command:

.. code-block:: bash
	:linenos:

	export JAVA_OPTS="$JAVA_OPTS -Xms1024m -Xmx2048m -XX:MaxPermSize=512m"


**[WIN]** Insert at the beginning of the ``TOMCAT_HOME/bin/setenv.bat`` file this command:

.. code-block:: bash
	:linenos:

	set JAVA_OPTS= %JAVA_OPTS% -Xms1024m Xmx2048m -XX:MaxPermSize=512m

Commit message:

Moved Encoding configuration
Moved Encoding configuration

installation-guide/ka_inst_man_tomcat.rst, after:

Using Tomcat
----------------

Dependencies
~~~~~~~~~~~~
You must add required libraries into ``TOMCAT_HOME/lib`` folder:

-  the JDBC connector for the metadata database with its dependencies (if any);
-  the JDBC connector for the business data database with its dependencies (if any);
-  the commonj library with its dependencies:

   -  `Apache Geronimo <https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=org/apache/geronimo/specs/geronimo-commonj_1.1_spec/1.0/geronimo-commonj_1.1_spec-1.0.jar>`_,
   -  `Concurrency JSR-166 <https://search.maven.org/remotecontent?filepath=org/lucee/oswego-concurrent/1.3.4/oswego-concurrent-1.3.4.jar>`_,
   -  `CommonJ <https://github.com/SpagoBILabs/SpagoBI/raw/mvn-repo/releases/de/myfoo/commonj/1.0/commonj-1.0.jar>`_.

.. important::
         **Enterprise Edition only**

         To enable the Import/Export capability, please also add the JDBC connector for `HyperSQLDB <https://repository.jboss.org/nexus/content/repositories/thirdparty-releases/hsqldb/hsqldb/1.8.0.2/hsqldb-1.8.0.2.jar>`_ , taking care of using version 1.8.0.2 .


File system resources
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Create the folder ``TOMCAT_HOME/resources``. Such a folder will contain some useful static resources and the indexes for the search engine used by Knowage.

Connection to metadata database
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To define connection towards metadata database, edit the ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` and add the information related to the metadata database inside the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag. Specify: username, password, driver class name, JDBC URL and validation query (any valid query to be executed to validate connections). Connection's name must the ``jdbc/knowage``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

    <Resource auth="Container"
    	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
    	name="jdbc/knowage"
    	password="<password>"
    	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
    	url="<JDBC URL>"
    	username="<user name>"
    	validationQuery="<validation query>"
    	maxTotal="50"
    	maxIdle="50"
    	minIdle="10"
    	validationInterval="34000"
    	removeAbandoned="true"
    	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
    	logAbandoned="true"
    	testOnBorrow="true"
    	testWhileIdle="true"
    	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
    	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000" />


Cache database connection
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In some scenarios (for example when defining a cockpit document on top of a file dataset), Knowage requires a database to be used as cache. It is highly recommended to create an empty database schema for this purpose. Then, you need to configure it inside ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` as you did for metadata database. Feel free to type a name of your choice, in this example we used ``jdbc/ds_cache``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

    <Resource auth="Container"
    	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
    	name="jdbc/ds_cache"
    	password="<password>"
    	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
    	url="<JDBC URL>"
    	username="<user name>"
    	validationQuery="<validation query>"
    	maxTotal="50"
    	maxIdle="50"
    	minIdle="10"
    	validationInterval="34000"
    	removeAbandoned="true"
    	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
    	logAbandoned="true"
    	testOnBorrow="true"
    	testWhileIdle="true"
    	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
    	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000" />


Connection to business data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Edit the ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` and add the information related to the database containing business data to be analysed by Knowage inside the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, specifying username, password, driver class name, URL and validation query. Feel free to type a name of your choice, in this example we used ``jdbc/dwh``:

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

  <Resource auth="Container"
  	driverClassName="<JDBC driver>"
  	name="jdbc/dwh"
  	password="<password>"
  	type="javax.sql.DataSource"
  	url="<JDBC URL>"
  	username="<user name>"
  	validationQuery="<validation query>"
  	maxTotal="50"
  	maxIdle="50"
  	minIdle="10"
  	validationInterval="34000"
  	removeAbandoned="true"
  	removeAbandonedTimeout="3600"
  	logAbandoned="true"
  	testOnBorrow="true"
  	testWhileIdle="true"
  	timeBetweenEvictionRunsMillis="10000"
  	minEvictableIdleTimeMillis="60000"
  	factory="org.apache.tomcat.jdbc.pool.DataSourceFactory" />


Environment variables definition
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Edit the file ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` in Tomcat and add the following constants in the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, by setting the domain within the ``host_url`` value. That domain will be used by the browser to call Knowage server.

.. code-block:: xml
        :linenos:
        :caption: Tomcat environment variables configuration.

  <Environment name="resource_path" type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/resources"/>
  <Environment name="sso_class" type="java.lang.String" value="it.eng.spagobi.services.common.JWTSsoService"/>
  <Environment name="service_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080/knowage"/>
  <Environment name="host_url" type="java.lang.String" value="<server URL which is hosting knowage>"/>
  <Environment name="hmacKey" description="HMAC key" type="java.lang.String" value="...PUT_HMACKEY_VALUE_HERE..."/>
  <Environment name="password_encryption_secret" description="File for security encryption location" type="java.lang.String" value="<complete_file_path_with_file_name>"/>

Such environment variables have the following meaning:

- ``resource_path``: resources folder path,
- ``sso_class``:SSO connector class name,
- ``service_url``:backend services address, typically set to ``http://localhost:8080/knowage``,
- ``host_url``: frontend services address, the one the user types in his browser.
- ``hmacKey``: secret key to generate JWT tokens used by the default security mechanism. You **must change** it, and **do not distribute** it.
- ``password_encryption_secret``: File used for password encryption. The file must contain random text of any length. This is a security configuration, so don't use short strings. For example, you can create a file and write text into it. **Do not distribute** it for any reason.


.. important::

	 For security reasons the environment variable ``hmacKey`` must have a different value than **...PUT_HMACKEY_VALUE_HERE...**. Please DO NOT use the value shown in this documentation to avoid reducing the security level.


Below you can see an example of configuration of the above variables in the server.xml file

.. code-block:: xml
 :linenos:

  <Environment name="resource_path" type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/resources"/>
  <Environment name="sso_class" type="java.lang.String" value="it.eng.spagobi.services.common.JWTSsoService"/>
  <Environment name="host_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080"/>
  <Environment name="service_url" type="java.lang.String" value="http://localhost:8080/knowage"/>
  <Environment name="hmacKey" description="HMAC key" type="java.lang.String" value="<value_to_replace>"/>
  <Environment name="password_encryption_secret" description="File for security encryption location"
    type="java.lang.String" value="${catalina.home}/conf/knowage.secret"/>


Applications deploy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
To deploy Knowage you have to copy all the WAR files inside the ``TOMCAT_HOME/webapps`` folder.
Once the first start is ended each WAR file will be unzipped. It is also possible to unzip the WAR files manually using the unzip utility.


Thread pool defintion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
You must configure ``TOMCAT_HOME/conf/server.xml`` file and add the settings related to the pool of thread editing the ``GlobalNamingResources`` tag, as shown follow.

.. code-block:: xml
	:linenos:

	<Resource auth="Container" factory="de.myfoo.commonj.work.FooWorkManagerFactory" maxThreads="5" name="wm/SpagoWorkManager" type="commonj.work.WorkManager"/>


Advanced memory settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It is recommended to increase the memory dimension used by the application server. This can be done by adjusting some properties. The memory required by each application server depends on many factors: number of users, type of analyses, amount of handled data, etc. The minimum requirements are ``Xms1024m`` and ``Xmx2048m``.

**[LINUX]** Insert at the beginning of the ``TOMCAT_HOME/bin/setenv.sh`` file this command:

.. code-block:: bash
	:linenos:

	 <Connector address="0.0.0.0" port="8009" protocol="AJP/1.3" maxPostSize="2097152000" redirectPort="8443" URIEncoding="UTF-8" />



**[WIN]** Insert at the beginning of the ``TOMCAT_HOME/bin/setenv.bat`` file this command:

.. code-block:: bash
	:linenos:

	set JAVA_OPTS= %JAVA_OPTS% -Xms1024m Xmx2048m -XX:MaxPermSize=512m

Advanced Connecor settings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. important::
         It is highly recommend to add  URIEncoding="UTF-8" attribute to server.xml file connector tags in order to avoid special characters issues.

.. code-block:: bash
	:linenos:
